DTLTO: use simpler JSON format and address remaining review comments (#3)
bd1976bris/llvm-project: llvm/docs/DTLTO.rst

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO)
===========================

Distributed ThinLTO (DTLTO) enables the distribution of backend ThinLTO
compilations via external distribution systems, such as Incredibuild, during the

> traditional link step.

Reviewer: Perhaps drop `traditional`?

> DTLTO builds on the existing ThinLTO distribution support which uses separate

Reviewer: Perhaps `builds on` -> `extends`? I think the mention of "builds" could be a little confusing in this context.

*thin-link*, *backend compilation*, and *link* steps. This method is documented
here:

    https://blog.llvm.org/2016/06/thinlto-scalable-and-incremental-lto.html

Using the *separate thin-link* approach requires a build system capable of
handling the dynamic dependencies specified in the individual summary index
files, such as Bazel. DTLTO removes this requirement, allowing it to be used
with any build process that supports in-process ThinLTO.

The following commands show the steps used for the *separate thin-link*
approach for a basic example:

.. code-block:: console

    1. clang -flto=thin -O2 file1.c file2.c -c
    2. clang -flto=thin -O2 file1.o file2.o -fuse-ld=lld -Wl,--thinlto-index-only
    3. clang -O2 -o file1.native.o -x ir file1.o -c -fthinlto-index=./file1.o.thinlto.bc
    4. clang -O2 -o file2.native.o -x ir file2.o -c -fthinlto-index=./file2.o.thinlto.bc
    5. clang file1.native.o file2.native.o -o a.out -fuse-ld=lld

> With DTLTO, steps 2.-5. are performed internally as part of the link step. The

Reviewer: Drop the `.` from the step numbers.

equivalent DTLTO commands for the above are:

.. code-block:: console

    clang -flto=thin -O2 file1.c file2.c -c
    clang -flto=thin -O2 file1.o file2.o -fuse-ld=lld -fthinlto-distributor=<distributor_process>

For DTLTO, LLD prepares the following for each ThinLTO backend compilation job:

- An individual index file and a list of input and output files (corresponds to

>   step 3. above).

Reviewer: `3.` -> `2`

Author: Thanks for spotting this!

- A Clang command line to perform the ThinLTO backend compilations.

This information is supplied, via a JSON file, to ``distributor_process``, which
executes the backend compilations using a distribution system (corresponds to

> step 4. above). Upon completion, LLD integrates the compiled native object files

Reviewer: '4.' -> '4' and what about 3?

Author: Quite right. Changed to 3 and 4. Thanks.

> into the link process and completes the link (corresponds to step 5. above).

Reviewer: `5.` -> `5`

This design keeps the details of distribution systems out of the LLVM source
code.

> An example distributor that runs ``clang`` on the local system is included in

Reviewer 2: Without knowing precisely what a distributor does just yet, the wording could possibly be misunderstood, suggesting that clang is run once somehow/somewhy. Unlikely I guess, but maybe something more like "An example distributor that performs all work on the local system is included in the LLVM source tree." ?

the LLVM source tree. To run an example with that distributor, a command line
such as the following can be used:

.. code-block:: console

   clang -flto=thin -fuse-ld=lld -O2 file1.o file2.o \
     -fthinlto-distributor=$(which python3) \

>      -Xthinlto-distributor=$LLVMSRC/llvm/utils/dtlto/local.py

Reviewer: I assume these don't exist yet as this PR is "LLVM only"? Shouldn't that second option have `-arg` at the end or is that the purpose of the `-X`, i.e. implies append?

Author: > I assume these don't exist yet as this PR is "LLVM only"?

Upstream reviewers seem quite relaxed about this as long as the Clang and LLD changes go in quickly once the LLVM stuff is agreed.

> Shouldn't that second option have `-arg` at the end or is that the purpose of the `-X`, i.e. implies append?

That's what the -X implies.

3. Blocking execution until all backend compilations are complete.

Distributors must return a non-zero exit code on failure. They can be

> implemented as binaries or in scripting languages, such as Python.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implemented as platform native executables or in a scripting language, such as Python.
```

(I don't think this sentence about binaries vs scripting is really needed at all - but up to you).

Author: Thanks. I'll use the suggested reword. It's not entirely obvious from the interface that scripting languages can be used so I think it's best to keep the sentence.

Clang and LLD provide options to specify a distributor program for managing
backend compilations. Distributor options and backend compilation options can
also be specified. Such options are transparently forwarded.

The backend compilations are currently performed by invoking Clang. For further
details, refer to:

* Clang documentation: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThinLTO.html
* LLD documentation: https://lld.llvm.org/DTLTO.html

When invoked with a distributor, LLD generates a JSON file describing the
backend compilation jobs and executes the distributor, passing it this file.

JSON Schema
-----------

The JSON format is explained by reference to the following example, which
describes the backend compilation of the modules ``t1.bc`` and ``t2.bc``:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "common": {
            "linker_output": "dtlto.elf",

>             "args": ["clang.exe", "-c", "-flto", "-fprofile-sample-use=my.prof"],

Reviewer 2: Not a comment on the docs, but perhaps it would be wise to fully resolve the path to clang before squirting it into the JSON file? Else there's a risk that the lld and the distributor disagree on the location of the clang executable.

clang obviously works on Windows, but maybe a *nix example would be more typical here?

Author: A fully resolved clang executable name is included in the JSON. As this is just an example I shortened the path to reduce the line length. I'll make this a *nix example as suggested.

Reviewer 2: `/usr/bin/clang` isn't much longer. Suggest that instead, for the example?

>             "args": ["clang.exe", "-c", "-flto", "-fprofile-sample-use=my.prof"],

Reviewer: Ignoring the profiling option, is this deliberately different to the example code-gen invocations from the Bazel-like examples? Should `-ftlo` be `-flto=thin` or perhaps even be not specificed at all?

Author: Great comment. I'll make it as similar as possible to the Bazel-like example from earlier.  I'll remove the -flto.

            "inputs": ["my.prof"]
        },
        "jobs": [
            {
                "args": ["t1.bc", "-fthinlto-index=t1.1.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc", "-o", "t1.1.7944.native.o", "-fproc-stat-report=t1.1.7944.stats.txt"],
                "inputs": ["t1.bc", "t1.1.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc"],
                "outputs": ["t1.1.7944.native.o", "t1.1.7944.stats.txt"]
            },
            {
                "args": ["t2.bc", "-fthinlto-index=t2.2.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc", "-o", "t2.2.7944.native.o", "-fproc-stat-report=t2.2.7944.stats.txt"],
                "inputs": ["t2.bc", "t2.2.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc"],
                "outputs": ["t2.2.7944.native.o", "t2.2.7944.stats.txt"]
            }
        ]
    }

Each entry in the ``jobs`` array represents a single backend compilation job.
Each job object records its own command-line arguments and input/output files.

> Shared inputs and arguments are defined once in the ``common`` object.

Reviewer: Perhaps `inputs and arguments` -> `arguments and inputs`?

Reserved Entries:

- The first entry in the ``common.args`` array specifies the compiler
  executable to invoke.
- The first entry in each job's ``inputs`` array is the bitcode file for the
  module being compiled.
- The second entry in each job's ``inputs`` array is the corresponding
  individual summary index file.
- The first entry in each job's ``outputs`` array is the primary output object
  file.

An array-of-strings representation is used for command-line arguments to avoid

> issues with quoting and shell escaping.

Reviewer: Is this statement necessary? And there might still be "issues" depending on what the "executor" itself needs to do...

Author: I'll remove it. The less to review the better.

Command-line arguments and input/output files are stored separately to allow
the remote compiler to be changed without updating the distributors, as the
distributors do not need to understand the details of the compiler command
line.

> To generate the backend compilation commands, the job-specific and common
> arguments are combined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the backend compilation commands, the common and job-specific
arguments are concatenated.
```

> The above example generates the following backend compilation commands:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When consuming the example JSON above, a distributor is expected to issue the
the following backend compilation commands with maximum parallelism:
```

.. code-block:: console

    clang.exe -c -flto -fprofile-sample-use=my.prof t1.bc \
        -fthinlto-index=t1.1.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc -o t1.1.7944.native.o \
        -fproc-stat-report=t1.1.7944.stats.txt

    clang.exe -c -flto -fprofile-sample-use=my.prof t2.bc \
        -fthinlto-index=t2.2.7944.native.o.thinlto.bc -o t2.2.7944.native.o \
        -fproc-stat-report=t2.2.7944.stats.txt

Temporary Files

> ---------------

Reviewer 2: Was this section requested? This all looks like implementation details. I'm not sure why it's needed. If it's not here, the names/quantity/type of temporary files can change over time without requiring  a corresponding documentation update.

Author: Good points. I'm removing this section. Thanks.

During its operation, DTLTO generates temporary files. Temporary files are
created in the same directory as the linker's output file:

- **JSON Job Description File**:

>   - Format: ``<linker output file basename>.<PID>.dist-file.json``

Reviewer: Do we really want to explicitly mention `PID` here because this is the cause of randomness that normally prevents DBS's from caching.

Author: I have mentioned this in the upstream review. I'm going to remove this section entirely.

  - Example: ``dtlto.77380.dist-file.json`` (for output file ``dtlto.elf``).

- **Object Files From Backend Compilations**:

  - Format: ``<Module identifier basename>.<Task>.<PID>.native.o``
  - Example: ``my.1.77380.native.o`` (for bitcode module ``my.o``).

- **Summary Index Shard Files**:

  - Format: ``<Module identifier basename>.<Task>.<PID>.native.o.thinlto.bc``
  - Example: ``my.1.77380.native.o.thinlto.bc`` (for bitcode module ``my.o``).

> Temporary files are removed by default.

Reviewer: I would hope so too! Is this needed?

Author: I'm going to remove this section. Thanks.

TODOs
-----

The following features are planned for DTLTO but not yet implemented:

- Support for the ThinLTO in-process cache.
- Support for platforms other than ELF and COFF.
- Support for archives with bitcode members.
- Support for more LTO configurations; only a very limited set of LTO
  configurations is supported currently, e.g., support for basic block sections

>   is not currently available.

Reviewer: Actually, any reason why we haven't forwarded on the `MllvmArgs` of `lto::config`? I think this is actually the reason for one of our downstream DTLTO issues.

Author: Something to tackle after the first commit.

Author: Actually, I think MaskRay was more keen on forwarding the mllvm arguments that were applied to any clang invocation that invoked the linker to do DTLTO.
